With this second book of Practical School Discipline, we wish to send to each member of the Teachers’ Club our personal word of greeting. Applied Methods was written for you. Primarily it was written for you only. It is a book to help teachers, by means of teachers’ experiences. We believe it will lighten your work, brighten your school room, and lengthen your years of effective service by easing the friction in daily school routine. Work can no longer be drudgery when conducted according to principles which take the drudgery out of it.

Because we have faith in the principles herein discussed, we are desirous to learn from each member of the “Teachers’ Club” what the result has been in his or her individual case. Have you been particularly successful in the management of some difficult situation? Write and tell us about it. Have you failed to find your own specific problem treated within these pages? Tell us that also. Perhaps we can help you by letter.

The Teachers’ Club is a coöperative organization from which we expect the most stimulating results—results which can be made much more effective by personal correspondence with its members. Your experience may help another who is still struggling with the difficulty which you have overcome. Another teacher’s 6experience may help you. Our offices are clearing houses for exchange of views and mutual aid. Coöperation we believe to be the principle which eventually must supplant, throughout the world, the cruder method of competition. The members of the “Teacher’s Club,” the first and only one to be organized upon this plan, will be quick to recognize the higher ideal and to respond thereto.

Finally, if the better understanding of the principles herein treated, and the tonic effect of interchange of ideas with fellow teachers who appreciate your difficulties and who desire to assist, should prove helpful to you, then tell other teachers about your Club. Perhaps they might profit also by the same mutual help. Meanwhile our thought for you does not end with placing these Case Books on Discipline within your hands.